meta: clarify pr objection process further (#59096)
nodejs/node: doc/contributing/collaborator-guide.md

Collaborators can object to a pull request by using the "Request
Changes" GitHub feature. Dissent comments alone don't constitute an
objection, nor do dissenting comments made in any associated issue.
A blocking objection to a change must be made in the pull request that
specifically proposes that change. Any pull request objection must include
a clear reason for that objection, and the objector must remain responsive
for further discussion towards consensus about the direction of the pull
request. Where possible, provide a set of actionable steps alongside the

> objection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
objection.
If a person objected in an issue, or a former PR, please mention them in the PR description
and provide up to a week for them to reply.
```

That way we prevent someone to just go ahead and open a new PR and someone missing the new one.
I think that would be beneficial.

Reviewer 2: I don't think it's reasonable to add that, it's too easy to miss. Pinging possible objectors is a nice thing to do, but we cannot have it as a rule, that's the reason we added the "objections must be done through GH UI" rule

Author: Agreed. blocks need to be explicit or they are way too easy to miss.

thank you for the suggested edit but I prefer the current text over the suggested edit.

Pull requests with outstanding objections must remain open until all
objections are satisfied. If reaching consensus is not possible, a
collaborator can escalate the issue to the TSC by pinging `@nodejs/tsc` and

> adding the `tsc-agenda` label to the issue and the TSC may choose to overrule
> or dismiss an objection. When the TSC does choose to overrule an objection,
> the TSC must provide a clear explanation of its reasoning in the pull request
> before the pull request lands.

Author: ```suggestion
adding the `tsc-agenda` label to the issue. The change cannot proceed without
either reaching consensus or a TSC decision to dismiss the objection(s). If the
TSC does choose to dismiss any objections, a clear explanation of the reasoning
must be given in the pull request before it lands.
```

> must be given in the pull request before it lands.

Author: Yes Id say that counts and don't believe it needs to be called out here explicitly

> must be given in the pull request before it lands.

Reviewer 2: I believe it is: if it wasn't clear to me, chances are it won't be clear to everyone

All Collaborator objections are considered equal. There is no greater weight given to
objections from TSC members than from any other Collaborator.

Mistakes do happen from time-to-time. If a pull request is merged with an

> outstanding objection, corrective action should be taken. Any Collaborator

Reviewer 3: Could we make this stronger by stating it is an obligation if pressed?

```suggestion
outstanding objection, corrective action must be taken if requested. Any Collaborator
```

Author: Here I think "should be taken" is better. The "must be taken if requested" ends up meaning the same thing ultimately. We could upgrade this to just say, "corrective action must be taken.", which hopefully would satisfy more of the concerns on this. 

Specifically, I think we're all in agreement that corrective action in these cases is a requirement. I think where we disagree is about exactly what form that correction action takes. Some say it *must* be a revert while I'm arguing that a revert is only one of the options.

> outstanding objection, corrective action should be taken. Any Collaborator

Author: ```suggestion
outstanding objection, corrective action must be taken. Any Collaborator
```

proposing to revert the change or to make a follow-up change that addresses

> the objection. Such reverts / follow-ups are subject to the same review process
> as any other pull request but may be fast-tracked if uncontroversial.

Author: ```suggestion
the objection. Such reverts / follow-ups will typically be subject to fast-tracking, particularly if they are uncontroversial, but an
automatic, immediate revert is not always necessary and, in some
cases might not be ideal.
```

> follow-up change that addresses the objection. Such corrections will typically
> be subject to fast-tracking. An automatic, immediate revert is not always
> necessary or ideal.

Reviewer 3: Feels a little less harsh to reorder these clauses:

```suggestion
follow-up change that addresses the objection. While an automatic or immediate
revert is not always necessary or ideal, such corrections are typically subject to
fast-tracking.
```

> fast-tracking.

Author: ```suggestion
fast-tracking, but are not required to be fast-tracked. There are
times in which taking a slower path may be preferable.
```

Pull requests with outstanding objections must remain open until all
objections are satisfied. If reaching consensus is not possible, a
collaborator can escalate the issue to the TSC by pinging `@nodejs/tsc` and
adding the `tsc-agenda` label to the issue and the TSC may choose to overrule
or dismiss an objection. When the TSC does choose to overrule an objection,
the TSC must provide a clear explanation of its reasoning in the pull request
either before or when the pull request lands.

All objections are considered equal. There is no greater weight given to
objections from TSC members than from any other collaborator.

Mistakes do happen from time to time. If a pull request is merged with an
outstanding objection, any collaborator can open an issue or pull request
proposing to revert the change or to make a follow-up change that addresses
the objection. Such reverts / follow-ups are subject to the same review process

> as any other pull request but may be fast-tracked if uncontroversial.

Author: I'm -1 on always fast-tracking these as a rule. I'd fully expect that not fast-tracking would be an exception to the rule, however. What I would anticipate is that 99.9% of the time an immediate revert would be what everyone agrees to but I want to give us room if necessary. The proposed language does that. No change is ever final until it actually goes out in a release so there's typically no rush whatsoever to immediately revert. Given that, I'm not inclined to accept this suggestion but will leave it unresolved as I'd like to get more input from more collaborators and TSC members and will go with the majority consensus.

> as any other pull request but may be fast-tracked if uncontroversial.

Reviewer 3: It does seem to make sense that an objection to the revert should not be treated as any typical objection though, and should rather be an objection within the usage of these terms as opposed to an objection to the underlying change. Fast-tracking I don't have any great opinion on personally, other than calling out that it is eligible.

> as any other pull request but may be fast-tracked if uncontroversial.

Author: > It does seem to make sense that an objection to the revert should not be treated as any typical objection though ...

Yeah, I was struggling with how to reasonably differentiate this in language that wouldn't be confusing.

> as any other pull request but may be fast-tracked if uncontroversial.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps something like - the only grounds for objection for such a revert PR are on the question of process for whether the former objection was clearly stated as an outstanding objection with the objector having been available for discussion.

Collaborators should always assume good faith on the part of the merging
collaborator as it is most likely any outstanding objection was simply
overlooked by mistake. Collaborators objecting to a pull request can best
ensure their objections are addressed by remaining actively engaged and

> responsive in the discussion.

Author: I think it's important here to stress the good faith assumption. It's very easy for assumptions to be made that objections were ignored out of malice or carelessness when typically whenever this has happened over the history of the project it's nearly always just been a simple mistake. A core part of the collaborator guide is about setting the right tone, which is why we also cover details about how to do good code reviews in the same document. As such, I'm not inclined to accept this suggestion but will leave it unresolved as I'd like to get additional input from more collaborators and will go with the majority consensus.

> responsive in the discussion.

Author: If there's consensus to drop the "good faith" part here then fine, but I really view it as no different that the reminders to assume good faith that we already document in [CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/nodejs/node/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md), [GOVERNANCE.md](https://github.com/nodejs/node/blob/main/GOVERNANCE.md), and [code-of-conduct.md](https://github.com/nodejs/node/blob/main/doc/contributing/code-of-conduct.md). I'd also just say that saying that we should assume good faith does not mean that we doubt good faith when necessary.

> responsive in the discussion.

Reviewer 2: None of the documents you linked ask us to "assume" good faith, AFAICT those are just listing good faith as a required factor for collaboration.

> responsive in the discussion.

Reviewer 4: I think we can safely drop the good faith.

> responsive in the discussion.

Reviewer 5: in the CoC:
> Contributors can disagree with one another so long as they trust that those disagreements are in good faith

reads to me as it does indeed require an assumption/trust of good faith. whether it's present here or not doesn't change that.

> responsive in the discussion.

Reviewer 6: I agree with James here it's important to remind people that most of the people in the project are volunteers trying to contribute their time for the betterment of Node and more often than not mistakes and miscommunication happen in good faith

> responsive in the discussion.

Author: I've removed the "good faith" and reworked the language here a bit. Please take another look

Pull requests with outstanding objections must remain open until all
objections are satisfied. If reaching consensus is not possible, a
collaborator can escalate the issue to the TSC by pinging `@nodejs/tsc` and

> adding the `tsc-agenda` label to the issue and the TSC may choose to overrule
> or dismiss an objection. When the TSC does choose to overrule an objection,
> the TSC must provide a clear explanation of its reasoning in the pull request
> before the pull request lands.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
adding the `tsc-agenda` label to the issue. The change cannot proceed without either
reaching consensus or a TSC vote dismissing the objection(s).
```

Author: How about:

```
The change cannot proceed without either reaching consensus
or a TSC vote dismissing the objection(s). If the TSC does
choose to dismiss any objections, a clear explanation of the
reasoning must be given in the pull request before it lands.
```

All objections are considered equal. There is no greater weight given to

> objections from TSC members than from any other collaborator.

Author: I prefer this second suggestion. The first is a bit confusing.

Mistakes do happen from time to time. If a pull request is merged with an
outstanding objection, any collaborator can open an issue or pull request
proposing to revert the change or to make a follow-up change that addresses

> the objection. Such reverts / follow-ups will typically be subject to
> fast-tracking, particularly if they are uncontroversial, but an
> automatic, immediate revert is not always necessary and, in some
> cases might not be ideal.

Reviewer 7: I see that my original review was marked as resolved but it still applies:

```suggestion
the objection. Such reverts / follow-ups will be fast-tracked to keep the 
main branch in a state where the governance of the project is aligned.
```

Reviewer 7: I strongly believe that reverting a mistake should be different than a regular pull-request.

Author: Ok, I doubt we're going to come to agreement on this point naturally so we'll leave this point unresolved for now. I've tagged `tsc-agenda` but also encourage further input from other collaborators.

Reviewer 3: I do still tend to agree here per my previous comment - that if there was a process issue and something was merged without following proper process, the revert should only be possible to object to based on the reason that the initial PR objection did not follow the correct process to be considered a formal and active objection.

Author: I've updated the text to make it clear that regardless of what form the corrective action takes, corrective action should be taken. I just think it's important that we don't strictly limit ourselves to "revert" as the *only* possible corrective action.

Reviewer 7: I still disagree. We should always revert and ask questions later when a pull-request was "mistakenly" merged into the main branch.

Author: @nodejs/tsc ... we'll likely need a TSC decision on this.

To make the different sides clear here... We are in agreement that when a PR ends up being merged with an outstanding objection, corrective action must be taken. The disagreement is about *what* the corrective action should be. On one side is the argument that the corrective action *must* always be an immediate unconditional total revert. What I'm advocating for is that the corrective action should be contextual and can be *either* a revert or an additional follow-up change that addresses the objection, based entirely on the nature of the objection.

For example of a case where I believe a revert would actually be counter-productive... let's imagine a case where a PR changes several thousand LOC and the outstanding objection was "please add a test". If the PR gets merged without adding the test, it seems silly to me that we'd revert the entire PR forcing folks to do a full code review again on a several thousand line PR as opposed to one that just adds the missing test.

Unconditionally requiring a full revert adds unnecessary friction and potential animosity to the process. Such mistakes have always been rare and have always been accidents or simple misunderstandings.

Reviewer 8: > let's imagine a case where a PR changes several thousand LOC and the outstanding objection was "please add a test"

 This scenario doesn’t match my definition of “mistakenly merged.” A missing test can be addressed with a follow-up PR. However, if a PR is merged despite a substantive “Request Changes”—for example:

* “I don’t think we should have this feature because…”
* “We must not land this without a benchmark or a complete test suite; it may fail on architecture X.”

—then it should be reverted. If the reviewer agrees with the PR’s intent but wants enhancements, they would request a follow-up PR rather than a revert.

Author: @RafaelGSS ... we treat all objections the same.

If I use the Red X on a PR and say, "This needs a test before it can land" then that's just as much a blocking concern as, "This shouldn't land at all". If the PR gets merged then a corrective action must be taken that ensures the main branch is in a state that reflects the agreement.

If the objection is, "This shouldn't land at all" then I'd agree a revert is likely the only remedy. If the object is, "This needs a test" then a revert is not the correct action. This guideline change makes no attempt to differentiate between different kinds of objections and it would be a mistake to do so. An objection is an objection.

> ... If the reviewer agrees with the PR's intent but wants enhancements, they would request a follow-up PR rather than a revert ...

This is in agreement with what I've proposed. What @anonrig is saying he wants is that the reviewer wouldn't have a choice in deciding which corrective action they want. It would always be a revert even if the reviewer was fine with a follow up PR. What I'm saying, and what this proposed text is saying is that while corrective action is required, what that corrective action should be is a choice.

Reviewer 2: I can think of scenario when having a mandatory revert would add unnecessary churn, I think we're reasonable folks, if something was landed by mistake we wouldn't block the PR and would on the contrary approve the fast-track – if not, likely it'd because of a disagreement on whether landing the PR was a mistake, at which point the mandatory reverts would probably only escalate the dispute.
TL;DR, I'm with James on that one, mandatory reverts are unnecessary and undesirable.

Reviewer 8: I think, at this point, we'll agree to disagree. But, I won't block this PR from landing, I'm actually happy-ish with:

> "Mistakes do happen from time-to-time. If a pull request is merged with an
outstanding objection, corrective action must be taken. Any Collaborator
can open a pull request that either reverts the change or makes an additional
follow-up change that addresses the objection. While an automatic or immediate
revert is not always necessary or ideal, such corrections are typically
subject to (but not required to) be fast-tracked. There are times in which
taking a slower path may be preferable to ensure appropriate consensus
moving forward".

So, do not consider my comment as a blocker.

Reviewer 8: > **1. If a PR is merged despite an unresolved substantive objection or required change, it must be reverted.**

Regardless of what our current process says, I still believe this should be our first recommendation. We’ve discussed it and don’t share the same view, which is why I said we agree to disagree.

Author: @anonrig ... please take a look at the most recently updated text and let me know if you're still objecting.

Author: It's been over a week since the ping for follow-up here without any response. Given that and the other sign offs, I'm inclined to dismiss the objection here per the rule https://github.com/nodejs/node/blob/main/doc/contributing/collaborator-guide.md#objections "If the objector is unresponsive for seven days after a collaborator asks for clarification, a collaborator may dismiss the objection".

> moving forward.

Author: Awesome! ... see, I knew we weren't really that far off ;-)

> moving forward.

Reviewer 9: Yup.

> moving forward.

Author: Awesome, committing the suggestion.

Pull requests with outstanding objections must remain open until all
objections are satisfied. If reaching consensus is not possible, a
collaborator can escalate the issue to the TSC by pinging `@nodejs/tsc` and
adding the `tsc-agenda` label to the issue. The change cannot proceed without
either reaching consensus or a TSC decision to dismiss the objection(s). If the
TSC does choose to dismiss any objections, a clear explanation of the reasoning
or a link to the public vote must be given in the pull request before it lands.

All Collaborator objections are considered equal. There is no greater weight given to
objections from TSC members than from any other Collaborator.

> Mistakes do happen from time-to-time. If a pull request is merged with an
> unresolved objection, corrective action must be taken. What corrective
> action to take will vary on the nature of that objection. Some might be
> simple to resolve just by opening a follow-up PR that addresses it; others
> may require a full revert. When in doubt, it's likely best to propose a full
> revert, but use your judgement as other options might be available. In every
> case it is most likely the correction will be fast-tracked. There are times,
> however, when taking a slower path may be preferable, or even necessary, to
> ensure appropriate consensus or stability moving forward.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
If a pull request is merged despite an unresolved objection, fix it right away:

- Minor issue? Open a follow-up PR that addresses the concern.
- Unclear or major issue? Propose a full revert.

Most corrections can be fast-tracked. If deemed necessary, take a slower route to ensure stability and consensus.
```

I would suggest to reduce the amount of auxiliary phrases because to me as a non-English speaker it reads like an essay written for our typical English exam: I only have a few words to say but the exam tells me I must write 300 words so I will expand it as much as possible to make it that long.

Author: How about, 

```
Mistakes do happen from time-to-time. If a pull request is merged with an
unresolved objection, it needs to be fixed. Some issues are simple that can
be fixed with a follow-up PR that addresses the concern, but others may be
more difficult and require a full revert. Most corrections can be fast-tracked.
If deemed necessary take a slower route to ensure stability and consensus.
```

> Mistakes do happen from time-to-time. If a pull request is merged with an
> unresolved objection, corrective action must be taken. What corrective
> action to take will vary on the nature of that objection. Some might be
> simple to resolve just by opening a follow-up PR that addresses it; others
> may require a full revert. When in doubt, it's likely best to propose a full
> revert, but use your judgement as other options might be available. In every
> case it is most likely the correction will be fast-tracked. There are times,
> however, when taking a slower path may be preferable, or even necessary, to
> ensure appropriate consensus or stability moving forward.

Author: ```suggestion
Mistakes do happen. If a pull request is merged with an unresolved objection,
submit a fix. Simple issues may be fixed with a follow-up PR that addresses
the concern. More difficult issues may require a full revert. Most corrections
can be fast-tracked. If deemed necessary take a slower route to ensure stability
and consensus.
```

> Mistakes do happen from time-to-time. If a pull request is merged with an
> unresolved objection, corrective action must be taken. What corrective
> action to take will vary on the nature of that objection. Some might be
> simple to resolve just by opening a follow-up PR that addresses it; others
> may require a full revert. When in doubt, it's likely best to propose a full
> revert, but use your judgement as other options might be available. In every
> case it is most likely the correction will be fast-tracked. There are times,
> however, when taking a slower path may be preferable, or even necessary, to
> ensure appropriate consensus or stability moving forward.
> 
> Collaborators objecting to a pull request can best ensure their objections
> are addressed by remaining actively engaged and responsive in the discussion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a pull request is accidentally merged with an unresolved objection, a revert
should be opened that should be fast-tracked. In that PR, the objecting
person should be asked, if it's possible to address the issue differently, for
example by proposing a follow-up PR instead.
```
